Welcome back to the advanced course in
Tableau. This is Kirill Eremenko and I'm
super excited to have you here and in
the previous tutorial we talked about
groups we found out why we need to use
them and when we can use them and today
we're going to talk about sets and right
off the bat, I wanted to mention an
important thing and that is that sets
are not groups. Even though they might
appear to be similar, they have different
use cases and they work differently and
quite a lot of people get them confused
and mixed up and don't really understand
what the differences are even though
they're very trivial differences but
don't worry
in this section I will make sure that by
the end of it you are a hundred percent
confident what the differences are, how
they work differently and when you would
use a group and when you would use a set
so let's dive straight in. There are two
ways of creating sets in Tableau and one
is a static way the other one is a
dynamic way. In today's tutorial we're
going to look at the static way of
creating sets, so here we've got our
chart of industries and as you recall we
grouped our industry so we created a few
groups of industries. Let's go ahead and
look at those groups, if we right-click
and click edit group here you'll see
that we have two groups. We have a group
for information technology and we have a
group for construction room and and
environmental services so this one we
created just to prove, as a proof of
concept so let's get rid of that one and we'll
click ungroup, we'll click apply
so just as a quick reminder what is
going on in Tableau right now.
Well what we did by creating this group
is we changed the metadata. We can change
the data itself but we changed how
Tableau perceives the data and why using
this field industry and then group in
brackets what we're doing is we're
telling Tableau that in that when you
look at the data, there is no longer
for there's all these four categories in
the in the industry they don't exist
anymore.
We only have one new category to replace
them which is called information
technology so basically any records that
used to fall in either of these
now all fall under information
technology. Alright so that's how a group
works, now let's say you don't actually
want to put all these four groups in you
don't wanna merge them together. So
basically group merge them together you
don't want to merge them but you do want
to signify that they are somehow related
and be able to quickly just refer to
them in your analysis and a simple
example is let's say in this chart you
want to look at them. Just filter out
does those specific four groups, so let's
rename this tab to industries group.
So here, this means that we will
look we're talking about groups and
let's duplicate the sheet and this one
we'll call it industries sets and now
we'll get rid of groups so we'll get rid
of this filled with group and we'll
replace it with the normal industry
field which doesn't have the groups
anymore and will order it again. So now
you can see we have our old fields or
our old categories telecommunication IT
services software and computer hardware.
Now let's say we want to look at just
these four, we don't look at all the
industry we just want to look at those
four. How would you go about it normally?
Well you take your industry field, you'll
hold down control, put into filter and you
would click none and then you would find
the ones you want computer hardware, IT
services, telecommunication and software.
You click ok and there you are so you
have those four that you were looking for.
Ok so that's one way to do it now let's
say you
let's say you don't want that anymore.
Let's say you want to look at all the
industries but you want to color just
those four alone so in order to do that
what you would do is you take industry
drag it into color. You'd go in to color
you go edit colors and you would get
take all of these and give them one
color and then you would find the ones
you're after computer hardware, ID
service allocation software and you give
a different color you click apply.
So there you go there highlighted for
you and now you can actually see them
and they're not merged notice that
they're not merged
what you wanted is you just wanted to
highlight them. Now as you can see, all
these processes are quite tedious and to
redo them every time or different charts
might take some someone quite a lot of
your time and instead of doing analysis
you're actually just doing this
repetitive task. Well in Tableau there's
a much faster way you can do this and so
that you can replicate it very quickly
and that is where we introduce set. So
let's get rid of this color from here
now and let's select the industries
that were interested in so software,
telecommunications, IT services and
computer hardware and now if you put
your mouse next to one of them what
you'll see is next to the group icon
you have a create set. So let's go ahead and
click that, create a set and let's give
it a name. We'll call it information
technology set and we'll click okay. So
nothing changed in our chart but what
you can see here down down at the bottom
a new tab over here. It's called sets and we
have an information technology set so
let's do the following thing. Let's take
this set and drag it into filters and
what you'll see right away is that we're
left with exactly the industries we're
interested in.
Ok interesting so let's take it out and
let's take this set and drag it on to color and
once again which you can see is right
away
we've got the industries that were
interested in they're highlighted for us
and in color we have this in out type of
field that has appeared so we click on
color now and click edit you'll see that
there's only two categories. One
category is in another category is out,
and basically what they're saying is
that the in category represents all
records that do fall into our set. The
way we define the set was it includes a
software telecommunications, IT services
and computer hardware. So in your record
that falls into that set will be in the
in the category, anything that doesn't fall into
those industries will be in the out
category. So now we once again you can
change around the colors if you like and
you can control them that way so that's
a very trivial example of using sets and
you can really see how quickly
we are able to perform analysis. Let's
look at another example.
So I'm going to create a new sheet and
this one we'll call growth. As you
remember from our challenge, the board of
directors want to analyze the top
growing companies. So let's take the
names of companies and we will drag them
into rows and now we'll take growth and
we'll drag it into our label or the main
part of our chart and we want to sort
this by the growth. So we want the top
growths at the top. So before I do that
i'll just change the format so you can
see a bit better.
There we go and I don't want to be bold,
good. Now let's sort this field name, if
you click on name, we could sort and we
click descending field growth so we do
want by growth 20-15 percent. It doesn't
matter what aggregation you choose because
we are looking at the most granular
level so the role level and therefore
whether we choose sum average or
maximum going to be the same click ok
and here you can see they are being sorted.
So now before we continue actually,
I wanted to give you a quick tip right
away so what I might put it like a
yellow star here because these tips are
very handy look like Tableau hacks that
will benefit you in any kind of project
that you do. So here what we want to do
is you can see that growth is
represented by a like a number with
decimals instead of a percentage
let's change that, but the way we
normally do it is through formatting
right? We right-click and we click on the
label and we click format here but what
you can do is you can change it for the
field itself, so whenever you use that
field, it's always represented as a
percentage and that's exactly what we
want. So let's click the drop-down and
we'll go to change the default
properties number format and here if you
change percentage and let's get rid of
the decimals you see that we've changed
it and as you'll see further down it
will always be like this and if you ever
want to change it or like change in one
specific case then you can go through
the format option and so on but by
default it will be a percentage
which is very handy. So how do we select
the top 10 growths. Well let's select the
top 10 companies here and create a set
and will say top 10 startups by growth.
Ok click ok so now we've got a new set
and let's see how we can use it in other
tabs that we create another worksheet that we create. So
great so great a worksheet and here
we'll say tree map. Let's say we want to
tree map all the option and growing
companies and to create a tree map. We're
going to take ID or name doesn't really
matter. Put it into detail and then take
growth percentage and put it into size,
by the way I just wanted to mention as
well that I'm doing a lot of these
things very quickly because we discussed
a lot of this most of this we discussed
in the basic course on Tableau so if you
feel that you aren't keeping up then
perhaps you might want to revisit the
basic course and just refresh some of
the knowledge because we have so much to
cover in this course we can't afford to
just discuss the basic things that we've
already talked about.
Ok so we've created this tree map, lets
get some color I'm going to hold down
control and drag this into color and now I
want to only look at the top 10 right, so
let's make it even more interesting I'm
going to take the name I'm going to drag
into label. I'm going to drag the growth
into label as well. As you can see, I
can't see anything because there's no
there's no space I only want to look at
the top 10. How would I do it? I'll do it
through a filter but in this case I have
a set which I can drag into a filter and
there we go. Viola! That quick and if i
click font and give it a 12 a good old
12 making a bit bigger in size. So as you
can see that was that quick very very
simple. So that's how sets work and
that's how they can help you speed up
your analysis in Tableau and help you
avoid doing a lot of repetitive tasks.
The only drawback of this type of set is
that it is static. It is hard-coded so it
means that it won't change as your
data changes. It won't adjust, so let's
right-click on the set and click edit
set
and what you'll see here is that the
names of these top 10 growers are
actually hard-coded into the set. You can
delete some of them if you want and it
won't be the top 10 will be less but
there are two problems with this first
of all if you want to refresh this
analysis later on if you get new
data or if you want to do this same
analysis next year, it's not just a
matter of pointing at a different field
and everything automatically fixing
itself up. You will actually have to go
and look for these top growers again and
creating new seti n order to then
replace it in your now, replace this one
with the new set. The other thing is that
lets say the board of directors didn't
want the top ten growers they wanted the
top 20 or the top 100 because nobody
said how many exactly they want
of the top growers and if they want more,
you can't add more members to the set. You
have to create a new one. So there's a
lot of manual work involved with
updating the set whether your data
changes or whether your conditions the
conditions of your analysis change and
this is where dynamic sets will come to
the rescue. We will introduce them in the
next tutorial and I look forward to
seeing you then.
Until next time, happy analyzing.